"It's humiliating,"     Hilda Chester said. "If these fool aliens had waited a few more years before
they came, we likely    would have blown ourselves to kingdom come without ever knowing
there was more real estate around. Christ, from what the Roxolani say, races that scarcely
know how to work         iron fly starships and never think twice about it."
"Except when the starships don't get home," Charlie Ebbets answered. His tie was in his
pocket and his collar open         against Pasadena's fierce summer heat, although the Caltech
Atheneum was efficiently air-conditioned. Along                                                        with so many other engineers and scientists,
he depended on linguists like Hilda Chester for a link to the aliens.
"I don't quite understand it myself," she said. "Apart from the hyperdrive and contragravity, the
Roxolani are backward, almost primitive. And the other species out there must be the same,
or someone would have overrun them long since."
Ebbets said, "Once you see it, the drive is amazingly simple. The research crews say
anybody could have stumbled over the principle at almost any time in our history. The best\
guess is that most races did come across it, and once they did, why, all their creative           energy
would naturally go into refining and improving it."
"But we missed it," Hilda said slowly, "and so our technology developed in a different way."\
"That's right. That's why the Roxolani don't know anything about controlled electricity, to                   say
nothing of atomics. And the thing is, as well as we can tell so far, the hyperdrive and
contragravity don't have the ancillary applications the             electromagnetic spectrum does. All they
do is move things front here to there in a hurry."
"That should be enough at the    moment," Hilda said.                  Ebbets nodded. There were almost nine
billion people jammed onto   the Earth, half of them hungry. Now, suddenly, there were places
for them to go and a means to get them there.
"I think," Ebbets said musingly, "we're going to be an awful surprise to the peoples out there."
It took Hilda a second to see what he was driving at. " If that's a joke, it's not funny. It's been a
hundred years since the last war of conquest."
"Sure -- they've gotten too expensive and too dangerous. But what kind of fight could the
Roxolani or anyone else at their level of   technology put up against us? The Aztecs and Incas
were plenty brave. How much good did it do them against the Spaniards?"
"I hope we've gotten smarter in the last five hundred years," Hilda said. All the same, she left\
her sandwich half-eaten. She found she was not hungry anymore.
"Ransisc!" Togram exclaimed as the senior steerer limped into his cubicle. Ransisc was
thinner than he had been a few moons before, aboard the misnamed Indomitable. His fur had\
grown out white around several       scars Togram did not remember.
His air of amused detachment had not changed, though. " Tougher than bullets, are you, or didn't the humans think you were worth killing?"
"The latter, I suspect. With their firepower, why should they worry about one soldier more or
less?" Togram said bitterly. "I didn't know you were still alive, either."\
"Through no fault of my own, I assure you," Ransisc said. "Olgren, next to me--" His voice
broke off. It was not possible to be detached about everything.
"What are you doing here?" the captain asked. "Not that I'm not glad to see you, but you're
the first Roxolan face I've set eyes on since--" It was his turn to hesitate.
"Since we landed." Togram nodded in relief at the steerer's circumlocution. Ransisc went on,
"I've seen several others before you. I suspect we're being allowed to get together so the
humans can listen to us talking with each other."
"How could they do that?" Togram asked, then answered his own question: "Oh, the
recorders, of course." He perforce used the English word. "Well, we'll fix that."
He dropped into Oyag, the most widely spoken language on a planet the Roxolani had
conquered fifty years before. "What's going to happen to us, Ransisc?"
"Back on Roxolan, they'll have realized something's gone wrong by now," the steerer
answered in the same tongue.
That did nothing to cheer Togram. "There are so many ways to lose ships," he said gloomily.
"And even if the High Warmaster does send another fleet after us, it won't have any more luck
than we did. These gods-accursed humans have too many war-machines." He paused and
took a long, moody pull at a bottle of vodka. The flavored liquors the locals brewed made him
sick, but vodka he liked. "How is it they have all these machines and we don't, or any race we
know of? They must be wizards, selling their souls to the demons for knowledge."
Ransisc's nose twitched in disagreement. "I asked one of their savants the same question. He
gave me back a poem by a human named Hail or Snow or something of that sort. It was
about someone who stood at a fork in the road and ended up taking the less-used track.
That's what the humans did. Most races find the hyperdrive and go traveling. The humans
never did, and so their search for knowledge went in a different direction."
"Didn't it!" Togram shuddered at the recollection of that brief, terrible combat. "Guns that spit
dozens of bullets without reloading, cannon mounted on armored platforms that move by
themselves, rockets that follow their targets by themselves... And there are the things we
didn't see, the ones the humans only talk about -- the bombs that can blow up a whole city,
each one by itself."
"I don't know if I believe that," Ransisc said.
"I do. They sound afraid when they speak of them."
Ok, bis dan.
Wir haben alles heute geschafft.
